---
comments: True
disqusId: 58823d8cd92ccccad584fe5f92ae4323ecbb7f71 
layout: post
title:  Sapio Primer
subtitle: "Day 9: Rubin's Bitcoin Advent Calendar"
date: 2021-12-6
hashtags: [Bitcoin, AdventCalendar, Covenants, Sapio]
---


_Welcome to day 9 of my Bitcoin Advent Calendar. You can see the previous post
[here](/bitcoin/2021/12/05/advent-8/) or subscribe at
[judica.org/join](https://judica.org/join) to get the new posts in your inbox_


We're through the basics sections of the Advent calendar ow! Time for some more…
specific content on the bleeding edge!

This post is your introduction to the world of
[Sapio](https://learn.sapio-lang.org). Sapio is the programming framework I've
been developing for Bitcoin Smart Contracts. There's a *ton* of material on [the
website](https://learn.sapio-lang.org), so this post is going to be a bit
high-level and then you should jump into the docs after to learn more.

## What the heck is Sapio?

Sapio is a tool that helps you design and use Bitcoin smart contracts based on
covenants (like CTV) as well as manage potentially recursive state transitions
at terminal states.

That's a mouthful and a half… let's break it down with a very basic vault
deposit example.

Suppose I have 10 bitcoin sitting in my normal wallet.  I want to deposit it to
an exchange. I go to my exchange and request an address to deposit to. The
exchange wants their coins to be in a special cold storage whereby any move from
cold storage has to "mature" for 10 days since it was claimed before it's
spendable as a hot-spend, otherwise it stays in cold.  The hot wallet has logic
such that any unused funds after it transacts, goes back into the cold-storage
contract. We saw a contract like this in the  [day
7](/bitcoin/2021/12/04/advent-7/) post.

The exchange can use Sapio to generate an address that expects 10 coins and
encodes this cold-to-hot logic without requiring the cold keys be online! Better
than that, I don't even have to contact the exchange for the address. The
exchange can distribute a codesigned Sapio WASM applet that runs on my own
machine locally. I download the applet into my Sapio Studio GUI and that
generates the exchange deposit UX form for the contract that I (or my wallet)
automatically fills out and then generates a proper address/spending
transaction.

Upon receipt of the deposit information, (which can in certain circumstances be
completely on-chain in the txn, so no need for a separate communication
channel), the exchange can us the WASM to generate an identical deposit program
to verify the user isn't cheating somehow. **Bada-bing-bada-boom!**

We'll see in close detail examples like this coming in the following posts, but
to sum up, Sapio helped us with the following:

1. Authoring a Smart Contract Application for a cold storage deposit solution
1. Distributing it as a deterministic executable with a GUI User using it to make a
deposit
1. Receiving funds as a depositee directly into a smart contract
1. Generating withdrawal transactions out of the vault
1. Putting the remaining funds back into the cold storage

This is not a hypothetical, all of these components exist and are usable today!
Where there is an asterisk is that BIP-119 CTV does not yet exist, and so for
apps like this the exchange would have to run some kind of [signing
server](https://learn.sapio-lang.org/ch05-01-ctv-emulator.html) you connect to.
This works, but is a worse trust model.  For some applications, you don't need
CTV if you can get all of a contract's parties to run their own oracles.
Therefore you can still accomplish a lot without a worse trust model with what's
there today!
<hr>

Over the remaining posts we'll go into great detail on different applications
built in Sapio, but for now you can [skim through
learn.sapio-lang.org](https://learn.sapio-lang.org) to get started playing
around with your own designs.