---
comments: True
disqusId: cf54ae0f8fb6360507bbcfa099d6290926c6c381
layout: post
title: "Pillars of Bitcoin: Self Custody"
subtitle: "Day 3: Rubin's Bitcoin Advent Calendar"
date: 2021-11-30
hashtags: [Bitcoin, AdventCalendar]
---


_Welcome to day 3 of my Bitcoin Advent Calendar. You can see an index of all
the posts [here](/advent21) or subscribe at
[judica.org/join](https://judica.org/join) to get new posts in your inbox_



Not your keys, not your coin. A simple maxim often repeated by Bitcoiners, but
an important one. Why?

## That thing about the gold standard you probably heard before:

In the existing financial system, your assets aren't really your assets. Let's
suppose you own a share of Google. You don't really own that share, you own a
virtual claim and the actual certificate sits somewhere with a corporation like
The Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation (DTCC). So what? Why does it matter
who holds the paper?

The U.S. Dollar is a great example of why you should care. One dollar used to
represent an amount of Gold you could redeem for real physical
bite-it-to-see-its-pure gold. This was a promise of course, the paper dollar did
not have the actual gold in it. This was all good and dandy until in 1933,
Executive Order 6102 was put in place which made the holding of physical gold
illegal. Get arrested and go to jail illegal. EO 6102 mandated that all Gold be
turned in to the Federal Reserve. This was quickly followed by a devaluing of
the redemptive value of the dollar in Gold by the government from $20.67 per
troy ounce to $35 as a "one time" move[^troy]. Today a troy ounce costs around
$1,800. This is because in 1971 an Executive Order was put through that ended
the dollar's gold backing entirely.

### What's this got to do with Bitcoin?

If Bitcoin is held in accounts at regulated entities like exchanges a similar
act to 6102 could make redeeming actual bitcoin impossible for users of those
services. Suppose those users are forced to receive in place of their exchange
Bitcoin a Bitcoin Note that is backed by bitcoin. And then one day, the amount
of Bitcoin per Bitcoin Note can be reduced
-- or worse, completely unlinked.

If this happens, all is lost. Bitcoin is fundamentally about a monetary standard
for the world where no self-important rulers can manipulate the currency. Self
custody is a requirement for Bitcoin to avoid these sorts of takeovers. 

## OK, OK, I'll keep my coins off exchange...
Just fixing your behavior isn't enough, to keep Bitcoin functional you need most
users to follow suit.  Yet many users today do choose to keep some or all of
their Bitcoin on centralized services (yours truly included!). 

This is for two main reasons:

1. Game Theory: we can't do anything about this.  As long as not too many other
people are using an exchange for custody, it doesn't matter if you are since a
regulatory takeover won't be too effective. So selfishly, you may as well
benefit from the ease of keeping your coin on a service (assuming it is easier)
rather than taking responsibility for your own assets. Likewise if no-one else
is self custodying there's not much advantage for you to be either.
2. Software freakin' sucks for self custody! We can fix this. Although the
quality of wallets has improved dramatically from Bitcoin's early days, it's
still incredibly difficult to do well. Further, self-custody solutions don't
have solid options for handling many common needs such as inheritance, spending
limits, and more.

If we work on strengthening the fully self-sovereign self-custody options that
Bitcoin users have at their disposal, we can help more Bitcoin users to choose
to keep their funds themselves and achieve "herd immunity" against future
executive order 6102s. If we self custody in great number, we don't permit them
the immediate victory over most users. You can't arrest everyone, not easily at
least.

in short...

# PLEBZ
# TOGETHER
# STRONK

<hr>

[^troy]: A troy ounce of gold is about a 1 inch by 1 inch square that is 0.1 inches high.
