---
comments: True
disqusId: 806820625796a2fec679827543f7d35342e42e8a 
layout: post
title:  RoadMap or Load o' Crap?
subtitle: "Day 27: Rubin's Bitcoin Advent Calendar"
date: 2021-12-24
hashtags: [Bitcoin, AdventCalendar, Covenants, Sapio]
---


_Welcome to day 27 of my Bitcoin Advent Calendar. You can see the previous post
[here](/bitcoin/2021/12/23/advent-27/) or subscribe at
[judica.org/join](https://judica.org/join) to get the new posts in your inbox_


I know, I know.

God forbid, a roadmap. People hate roadmaps. As I've noted
[before](/blog/2021/07/02/covenants/):

> **Bitcoin Eschews Roadmaps and Agendas.**
> I provide this maxim to make clear that this document is by no means an official
> roadmap, narrative, or prioritization. However, it is my own assessment of what
> the current most pragmatic approach to upgrading Bitcoin is, based on my
> understanding of the state of outstanding proposals and their interactions.
> 
> My priorities in producing this are to open a discussion on potential new
> features, risk minimization, and pragmatic design for Bitcoin.

If you didn't click, I definitely recommend reading [the quoted
post](/blog/2021/07/02/covenants/) in conjunction with this one. As well as, if
you're a first time visitor to the Advent Calendar, the preceding 26 posts.

<hr>

In contrast to my prior post, this roadmap is going to be less about full
justifications and unbiased weightings and tallyings of sentiments and more just
me spitting out a timeline we could introduce changes on. It's not a final
answer, and in no way authoritative, but it's a launch point for a discussion
that has to happen in some way at some point in order to advance a soft-fork.

_Consider this as being posted for the sake of public review. If you disagree
with this, let me know why! But please no attacks just for the act of discussing
the topic of soft-fork activation[^ordo]._

[^ordo]: You do you though. It'd really hurt my feelings if you called me a Smelly Weasel attacking Bitcoin.

So buckle up here's how we could make Bitcoin kick ass in 2022 and beyond:

# 2022: The Year of the Covenant

## BIP-119 Timeline
CheckTemplateVerify is getting close to ready to go. There are numerous
[supporters (listed on utxos.org)](https://utxos.org/signals), few detractors,
and a bumper crop of amazing use cases (did you read the calendar?) waiting for
us on the other side of CTV activation. The major critiques are that we might want
something that does 'more' than CTV itself, or to include it in a bundle of
things.

My take: we're not Gordon Gecko. Greed is _Not_ Good. CTV represents a clean, well
contained, unproblematic upgrade that's going to deliver hella functionality in
service of scaling, decentralization, self custody, and privacy. Let's secure
the bag for Bitcoin users everywhere and make it happen. We can always do more,
later, informed by what extensions we need for rapidly maturing tools like
Sapio. CTV is also technically specified and implemented sufficiently -- a view
I've confirmed with a couple other devs -- that it is able to be considered for
release.

### What would have to happen to release CTV?

1. More signalers would need to be on
[utxos.org/signals](https://utxos.org/signals) or other platforms to demonstrate
interest and demand for CTV, ideally explaining which use cases are important to
them and why. Every voice counts for consensus.
1. More "regular contributors" would need to spend time reviewing the code and BIP to
assure themselves of correctness and safety.  Nothing can move forward with out,
no matter the count of casual contributors. Many regular contributors don't want
to 'get political' and look at forks. Fortunately, while all consensus changes
are complex, CTV is a very tiny and easy to review change in comparison with
SegWit or Taproot (more similar to CheckLockTimeVerify). **NOTE:** This is a big if!
Every contributor has the right to review, and ACK or provide a reasoned NACK.
Even if everyone else is excited about something doesn't mean there isn't space
for new, thought through, dissent.
1. We would need to merge the implementation. This is simple, but enough ACKs have to
   come in and rebases on other subsequent changes to get it in. This can
   happen ahead of 'full consensus' since there are no deployment parameters,
   but aids in increasing the testing priority of CTV.
1. We would need to get a majority of miners/pools primed to accept the upgrade.
1. We would need to decide on release parameters for the implementation.
1. We would need to merge and release a client with release parameters
1. The client would needs to lock-in by a supermajority of miners signalling.
1. Then, and only then, would CTV be fully available.

### What's the Maximally Aggressive/Optimistic Timeline?

1. Soft Signals / Developer Review: 2-3 months required to get ACKs on the
implementation, assuming no major changes required.
1. Merge: Instant, just whenever there are ACKs against the implementation being
safe and matching BIP.
1. Getting miners primed to signal: ~20% of pools are on
[utxos.org/signals](https://utxos.org/signals), more should be coming on board
soon. Don't expect this to take additional time if in conjunction with Developer
review.
1. Debating Timelines: ~1 month to agree on a release timeline
1. Preparing a release: ~1 month to do release candidates and testing.
1. Speedy Trial: 3 months of signalling, 3 months of waiting for lock-in to active.


### Overall, it could look like this:

On March 15th developers reach agreement on merging BIP-119's implementation.
On April 15th, agreement is reached on release parameters for signalling from ~
June 1st to ~September 1st. The active height would be November 10th.  A client
is prepared, and tested, and released. No issues are found. The miners signal at
some point in the 3 month window above the threshold. CTV locks-in. Developers
can prep wallet software for deeper integration. CTV activates before
Thanksgiving, avoiding the "dire straits" of
thanksgiving-hanukkah-christmas-chinese-new-year-valentines-day season.

_but that's basically identical to Taproot's timeline?_

Exactly. If we act on this timeline starting in early January 2022, it is
possible to meet an almost identical timeline for CTV as Taproot.

Part of why it works is that the next major release is scheduled for 2022-04-01.
Soft forks are usually released as a minor patch on top of a few recent major
releases. So CTV could be:

1. Code included in 23.0 for CTV, no activation parameters
1. Activation parameters in 23.1, and backported to 22.x, 21.x, and (really this is up to maintainers how far to backport!).
1. 23.1 released before June 1st, 2022.

**What could go wrong?**

1. **Concern:** There's a small tweak to CTV that makes it marginally better, and it's worth
adding some extra review time.\
**Rebuttal:**\
_CTV is highly design specific, so it's unlikely
there could be a change needed, but not impossible. Changes would be unlikely to
be large, though, e.g. perhaps comitting to the same fields in a different order._.
1. **Concern:** Release process has a delay due to an issue uncovered in non-CTV code.\
**Rebuttal:**\
_Soft fork releases are usually a minor patch onto an existing version, so it's
unlikely that there would be a new bug, but the release would still be planned
and could resume as soon as patched. Speedy Trial's 'delayed activation' also
helps with providing more time for (non-consensus) bug fixes in the client
between lock-in and activation._
1. **Concern:** Release process has a delay due to an issue uncovered in CTV's code.\
**Rebuttal:**\
_If the issue is a bug, it would merit more strict scrutiny on the code and
tests (which are pretty comprehensive currently) as to how they could be passing
with an issue like that. Once patched and reviewed, it's still possible to merge
and release. However, the issue could also be a conceptual bug (e.g., here's how
to do recrusive covenants with CTV), which would certainly delay (and I'd be the
first to say it!) continuing with CTV at the present time. The former issue is
likely more likely than the latter, and that risk is defrayed by thorough code
review and testing._
1. **Concern:** There's not developer consensus conceptually.\
**Rebuttal:**\
_There are many developers supporting on
[utxos.org/signals](https://utxos.org/signals). I've also made an effort to
reach out to a variety of developers who are not on the site to seek out
dissent, and I do not think there are any current safety concerns, which is
positive for developers who might not Ack but don't have a 'this is a grave
mistake' Nack up their sleeves._
1. **Concern:** Miners don't want CTV and don't signal for it.\
**Rebuttal:**\
_20% of the hash pools already say they do want it, and more should be joining
that list soon™._
1. **Concern:** Disagreement on Activation mechanism.\
**Rebuttal:**\
_Taproot's Speedy Trial worked very well. Big Success. No need to mess with the
recipe. UASF-clienters know how to make the mods to the activation logic for
whatever they want as a competing client. But perhaps that's not a comfortable
status quo, so this is certainly one to watch._

## And Then What?

After the release of CTV Soft Fork Client, what goes next?

1. Jeremy takes a vacation for a month.
1. Sapio continues to improve dramatically, as detailed in the last post.
1. Work begins on new Opcodes.
1. More fun applications get built on CTV/Sapio.
1. Non-Interactive Lightning Channel BOLT drops.
1. Payment Pool spec drops with LN integration.
1. (Privacy + Scale)++

## New Opcodes you say?

Yep, new opcodes. As soon as CTV is merged, there are some new features that
could be tooled into BIPs without much controversy, given their simplicity:

1. New Math Opcodes
1. OP_AMOUNT
1. OP_CSFS

These are "universally agreed on" bits of functionality that have very little
wiggle room in how they might be specified. Therefore their implementation,
testing, and release is mostly mechanical. This makes them good bets for a
concrete timeline because they're a rote-development task with few research
dependencies and easily agreed on design.

With hard work, these could be reviewed and tested in time for Speedy Trial
signalling in June 2023 (+1 year), with realllllly hard work 6 months earlier
(but there are conflicting priorities for developer's time -- e.g., building
stuff with/for CTV and Taproot -- that make that super unlikely).

### What about Anyprevout

Anyprevout is 1000000% not ruled out here for advancing to the consensus stage
in 2022. There are a couple things happening on Anyprevout that make me suspect
it might be more primed towards early-mid 2024 best case.

1. Taproot upgraded channels taking some steam away from Eltoo with AJ's
   proposal to do state compaction via PTLCs.
1. Disagreement over no justice transactions in the community for high value
   channels.
1. Open research on specific Eltoo protocol implementation / need for other
   tools (like SIGHASH_BUNDLE).
1. Lack of an open PR and test suite for it.
1. CSFS + CTV permitting a version of Eltoo.

All of these reasons point to it being highly unlikely APO could be finished on
the timeline presented for CTV, but also that given a desire to see a working LN
client (ensuring the protocol is sound end-to-end without modifications) leads
to additional engineering complexity.

I've heard on the rumour vine some excellent engineers might start working on an
Eltoo implementation, I believe that work to be of tremendous value to gain
consensus on anyprevout.

### What about TapLeafUpdateVerify

If I had to estimate, I'd say TLUV needs another year or so of people 'stewing'
on the possibilities and design before it could move forward. It would then
probably need at least a year of tinkering to get a well-accepted
implementation, and then a year for release process. So let's say best case it
could be a 2024 thing, more likely 2025 given Anyprevout is seen as higher
priority for the engineering work.

### What about Inherited IDs (IIDs)?

They didn't make the cut in the earlier piece since they're a bit more abstract,
but I'd posit that IIDs could also approach a 2024 timeline were the developer
of the idea to spend a heckin' big amount of time on advocacy for the concept in
2022, and present a clean implementation of the concept (& demonstration of
overheads) by 2023. This is complicated by the issue that he would have to also
solve issues with requiring a new index, such as helping assist assumeutxo
compatibility, write reindexing logic from genesis (or somehow exclude old
coins?), and also work on utreexo compatibility. Those all seem tractable,
but very hard to do for someone who is not a full-time long-time contributor
to the project, but I'm a believer that the job could be done given the quality
of the insights in the IIDs paper.


## Parallel Developments?

In parallel to the above, there are some things that I think are *very cool*
that should remain under development, but don't have a clear path to inclusion
presently.

The first is Transaction Sponsorship, which could substantially 
simplify many protocols on top of Bitcoin, especially things like Eltoo and CTV
stuff. We can't predict that too well because it will depend on what developers
end up running up against with current best practices around CPFP/RBF, but
I suspect it might become popular if a small group of developers prioritizes
such an approach as a unified front. Since it's technically simple, it wouldn't
take much time to implement, but because there's very little consensus for
it right now it's not fit for inclusion in a roadmap.

The next is Simplicity. Simplicity could completely change how Bitcoin
scripting works and is super duper exciting. I guess it's going out on Elements
sometime soon? However, it's stupidly complicated for most devs to fully
understand (although it is called simplicity...), so it would take a fair
amount of time (read: years) before the implementation could be sufficiently
independently reviewed by the intersection of qualified Bitcoin and Programming
Language theory reviewers. The interesting thing about Simplicity with respect
to this roadmap is that because it's so general, as soon as it seems like
Simplicity would be on Bitcoin within ~1.5 years, it's likely all other
scripting soft fork developers would "stop" development[^note] and focus on
deployment as Simplicity Jets.


[^note]: Transaction Sponsorship cannot be done, as far as I understand, as a
part of Simplicty. Things like that would progress independently.
