---
comments: True
disqusId: 9f7ea509d6b2d725a327dac86ca78b9fe0610a77 
layout: post
title:  Contracting Primitives and Upgrades to Bitcoin
subtitle: "Day 8: Rubin's Bitcoin Advent Calendar"
date: 2021-12-5
hashtags: [Bitcoin, AdventCalendar, Covenants, Upgrade, BIP119]
---

_Welcome to day 8 of my Bitcoin Advent Calendar. You can see an index of all
the posts [here](/advent21) or subscribe at
[judica.org/join](https://judica.org/join) to get new posts in your inbox_


In this post we'll rapid fire roll through a bunch of different smart contract
primitives, existing and proposed. For a more thorough reading, links will be
provided.

### BIP-119 CTV CheckTemplateVerify

CTV is a general purpose smart contract opcode with full enumeration, no dynamic
state, no recursion, and primarily works through validation.

Essentially, CTV only lets you select a specific next transaction that can
occur. Consensus just checks a transaction hash against a CTV hash.

Although this seems to be limited functionality, it can be used with a template
metaprogramming system such as [Sapio](learn.sapio-lang.org) to create
sophisticated programs.

 The limited functionality isn't a bug, it's a feature.  CTV was designed to be
 quick and easy to garner technical consensus with the entire Bitcoin community
 as a simple and safe covenant without some of the issues more sophisticated
 covenant systems might have. However, since its launch there's been more
 interest developing for more flexible covenants, which may take much longer to
 deploy and deliver meaningful benefits to users.

CTV is also designed to work well with other opcodes that might be added (such
as CSFS, OP_AMOUNT, and OP_CAT), so it does not become irrelevant should more
features be added, it simply gets better.

CTV is currently a decently reviewed BIP pending more support from the community
for inclusion (see [social signals](https://utxos.org/signals)).

Disclosure: I'm the author/advocate of BIP-119.

For more:

1. [Optech](https://bitcoinops.org/en/newsletters/2019/05/29/#proposed-transaction-output-commitments)
1. [utxos.org](https://utxos.org)
1. [Templates, Eltoo, and Covenants, Oh My!](https://rubin.io/blog/2021/07/02/covenants/)
1. [Shinobi's Covenant Concerns](https://medium.com/block-digest-mempool/my-worries-about-too-generalized-covenants-5eff33affbb6)

### BIP-118 APO AnyPrevout

AnyPrevout is a culmination of research for the Lightning Network (dating back
to the original whitepaper) for creating a type of "rebindable" bitcoin
transaction that dramatically simplifies the protocols for LN by getting rid of
a lot of the complexities around storing state and closing channels
unilaterally. AnyPrevout helps make Decker Channels possible (or, confusingly,
sometimes called Eltoo not to be confused with L2).

The basics of how Anyprevout works is that it changes what parts a signature
signs to exclude the specifics of the coin being spent. This has some drawbacks
in terms of changing current invariants true of signatures, but it is generally
safe.

APO can also be used to implement something similar to CTV, but there are
sufficient differences between the two (including with respect to efficiency)
such that the proposals aren't competitive.

APO is currently a decently reviewed BIP pending more support from the community
for inclusion. The largest blocker for wider support is a concrete functional
prototype of LN with Decker Channels, which would drive surety that APO has
"product market fit". Certain developers believe that additional proposals, like
SIGHASH_BUNDLE, would be required to make it fully functional.

1. [My BIP-118 Review](https://rubin.io/bitcoin/2021/07/09/bip-118-sighash-chart/)
1. [The BIP](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0118.mediawiki)
1. [Eltoo/Decker Channels](https://blockstream.com/eltoo.pdf)
1. [Templates, Eltoo, and Covenants, Oh My!](https://rubin.io/blog/2021/07/02/covenants/)

### TLUV TapLeafUpdateVerify

TLUV is a proposed general purpose smart contract opcode that is open ended, has
dynamic local state, recursive, and is somewhat computational.

Essentially, TLUV lets you modify a Taproot Output being spent by changing the
toplevel key and script paths being spent. TLUV only can read and affect a
single input/output pair; the other outputs are unaffected. The functionality of
TLUV is very "specific" to the implementation details of Taproot, as it must
correctly modify the data structures behind it. For Example, you could have a
Taproot output with 10 coins and a script like:

```json
[{"amt": 10,
  "key": "multi(A,B,C)",
  "scripts": ["signed(A) with up to 2 coins",
              "signed(B) with up to 5 coins",
              "signed(C) with up to 3 coins"]
 }
]
```

and TLUV would enable you to transition to the following outputs:


```json
[{"amt": 9,
  "key": "multi(A,B,C)",
  "scripts": ["signed(A) with up to 1 coins",
              "signed(B) with up to 5 coins",
              "signed(C) with up to 3 coins"]
 },
 {"amt": 0.25,
  "address": "someone paid by A"
 },
 {"amt": 0.75,
  "address": "someone else paid by A"
 }
]
```

or even a full exit:


```json
[{"amt": 9,
  "key": "multi(B,C)",
  "scripts": ["signed(B) with up to 5 coins",
              "signed(C) with up to 3 coins"]
 },
 {"amt": 0.25,
  "address": "someone paid by A"
 },
 {"amt": 0.75,
  "address": "someone else paid by A"
 }
 {"amt": 1,
  "address": "A's key (exiting funds)"
 }
]
```

There are some potential footguns around modifying the top level key, as it
needs to be a valid Taproot key after tweaking.

TLUV as designed requires some form of OP_AMOUNT to enable the
recursive shared UTXO shown above.

There is no current concrete proposal (e.g. BIP) for TLUV, it's open ended
research presently.

1. [Optech](https://bitcoinops.org/en/newsletters/2021/09/15/)
1. [Mailing List](https://www.mail-archive.com/bitcoin-dev@lists.linuxfoundation.org/msg10437.html)
1. [My Mailing List Response](https://www.mail-archive.com/bitcoin-dev@lists.linuxfoundation.org/msg10442.html)


### CSFS CheckSigFromStack

CheckSigFromStack, or CheckDataSig (note for experts: usually shorthand for the
verification-only version as there's little point to check that something wasn't
signed by someone) is an opcode which checks an arbitrary message was signed by
a key. Normally, when a Bitcoin script checks a signature, the message *must be*
a hash of the current transaction computed in accordance with the requested
transaction hashing program.

CSFS has a couple "basic" applications that could be useful. For example, one
might write a program where either a key K signs a transaction normally, or it
signs a key which then signs a transaction. This allows the holder of a coin to
"delegate" the ownership of a coin to another key without moving the coin.

CSFS already exists in Bitcoin in some sense: using Lamport Signatures it is
currently possible to check a signature over 5 bytes of data. This is not
terribly useful, but one could imagine certain uses for e.g. delegating to the
specified signer the duration of a timelock.

CSFS really shines when it is combined with other opcodes. For example, CSFS
plus CTV can enable something similar to AnyPrevout and Eltoo. CSFS plus CAT
enables fully generic covenants in segwit V0, but not in Taproot (without some
sort of OP_TWEAK as well). This is best left to reading some additional
materials on the subject, but imagine if I first check the transaction signature
normally, and then I check it on the stack against the transaction itself pushed
onto the stack, which I used CAT to assemble from pieces. This would let me run
programmatic checks on all the components of a script).

While there is not currently a proposal for CSFS, it's not terribly
controversial and the design would be relatively straightforward.

1. [BIP Suggestions](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2021-July/019192.html)
1. [Templates, Eltoo, and Covenants, Oh My!](https://rubin.io/blog/2021/07/02/covenants/)
1. [CSFS from Math (5 bytes)](https://rubin.io/blog/2021/07/02/signing-5-bytes/)

### OP_AMOUNT

OP_AMOUNT was proposed in 2017 by Johnson Lau (the earliest citation I could dig
up) through a scripting extension called PUSHTXDATA that allows arbitrary data
to be pushed on the stack. As a standalone extensions, getting the amount
spent/created on the stack (whether as a push opcode or an opcode with verify
semantics) would allow for smart contracts to either limit the amount being
spent or switch behavior based on the amount.

For example, with TLUV a Taproot branch can have an individual balance that can
be updated at the discretion of the branch holder. Suppose I had a script tree
that said Alice has 1 bitcoin and Bob has 20 Bitcoin. When Alice is spending,
the script would require that the corresponding output (e.g., input 0 output 0)
be reduced by at most 1 Bitcoin, and the output should be updated to change
Alice's script to have 1-(spent amount) in the next instance.

As another example, CTV could be used with an OP_AMOUNT to enable a ultra high
security vault if the amount sent is greater than 1 Bitcoin and a lower security
vault if it is less than 1 Bitcoin.

There's no current concrete proposal for OP_AMOUNT. Difficulties in adding it
remain because Bitcoin Scripts deal in 32-bit math and amounts are 64-bit values
(51 bits precisely).

1. [OP_PUSHTXDATA](https://github.com/jl2012/bips/blob/vault/bip-0ZZZ.mediawiki)
1. [OP_IN_OUT_AMOUNT](https://www.mail-archive.com/bitcoin-dev@lists.linuxfoundation.org/msg10438.html)

### SIGHASH_BUNDLE

Sighash Bundle is a part of an effort to make "Sighash Flags" more general.
Sighash Flags are a mini "programming language" to describe what parts of a
transaction a signer wants to sign for a transaction. Bundles in particular
allow a signer to select a range of inputs and outputs in a way that the bundle
description can be rebound to allow some form of post-hoc aggregation of
transactions.

It's primarily proposed to help make Decker Channels work with a sub-protocol
called "layered commitments". It's possible for inclusion, but it has the same
issue as AnyPrevout, we need to see an end-to-end implementation of LN using it
to be sure that the technology is solving the problem it is designed to.

There's no concrete implementation proposed yet.

1. [Mailing List Post](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2018-April/015862.html)

### Transaction Sponsors

Transaction Sponsors is another proposal by yours truly.

The basic concept of Transaction Sponsors is to allow expressing logic that
Transaction B should only be in a block if Transaction A is also in the block.
In particular, the proposal says that a transaction with a 0 value output with
script `OP_VER <txids>` would make the transaction valid only if the txids were
also in the block.

The ability to express such a dependency has implications for designing novel
smart contracts based on these dependencies, but this is not the focus of the
sponsors proposal with respect to mempool policy.

Instead, the Sponsors proposal is to use the ability to express additional
dependencies as a way of dynamically adding fees to transactions in the mempool
without relying on CPFP or RBF. This primitive is particularly helpful for
driving progress of smart contracts based on CTV or Decker Channels without
requiring any sort of transaction malleability.

There is currently an implementation and Draft BIP of Sponsors, but the BIP has
not been advanced for inclusion yet.

1. [Mailing List Post](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2020-September/018168.html)
1. [Post about difficulties of paying fees](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2021-November/019614.html)

### OP_CAT (Or SHASTREAM)

OP_CAT is "deceptively simple". All it enables is the ability to take an
argument "hello " and an argument "world" and join them together into "hello
world".

CAT was originally a part of Bitcoin, but it had some implementation flaws and
was removed by Satoshi in an emergency patch early on in Bitcoin's history.

Although it is simple, it turns out that the ability to join bytestrings
together adds a remarkable variety of functionality to Bitcoin, including things
like quantum proof signatures and covenants.  There are a couple different
variants of CAT that would be possible and have different tradeoffs, but largely
CAT and friends are not controversial in their design. What does make CAT
controversial is that because it has the propensity to introduce so many
surprising behaviors in Bitcoin, we might prefer to better understand the
impacts of users being able to author such advanced smart contracts.

1. [Quantum Proof Bitcoin](https://rubin.io/blog/2021/07/06/quantum-bitcoin/)
1. [Poelstra CAT Blog I](https://medium.com/blockstream/cat-and-schnorr-tricks-i-faf1b59bd298)
1. [Poelstra CAT Blog II](https://medium.com/blockstream/cat-and-schnorr-tricks-ii-2f6ede3d7bb5)

### OP_TWEAK / ECMUL

These two opcodes enable manipulating an elliptic curve point on the stack for
use in a covenant or to compute a particular private key.

There's no concrete proposal for this pair, but the implementations are
basically specified already by the requirements of the secp256k1 curve.

### Adaptor Signatures

Adaptor Signatures are a technique that can be used with Schnorr signature and
do not require any additional forks to Bitcoin.

The basics of an Adaptor signature is that a party (or group of parties) can
create an object which either takes in a signature and reveals a secret or takes
a secret and reveals a signature.

These adaptors can be used in place of hash preimage locks for a variety of use
cases.

1. [Optech](https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/adaptor-signatures/)

### Delegation / Graftroot

Delegation is a general concept whereby you can take a script and instead of
signing a transaction, you sign another script that can then execute. For
example, imagine if there is a coin that requires a signature of Alice and Bob
to spend. Suppose Alice wants to go offline, but Bob might want to transact.
Alice could sign a script requiring a signature from Carol that "substitutes"
for Alice's signature in the future.

Delegation is currently possible in a somewhat roundabout way through
coin-delegation. This is where the other script fragment must be represented by a UTXO.

Graftroot is an extension to Taproot which would let the top-level key-path
signers sign delegating scripts, but not other tapscript branches. There are
also several confusingly named extensions and alternatives in the links below.

Delegation could also be combined with Anyprevout so that delegation
authorizations are bound to a specific coin or to a specific script. CSFS
enables a basic kind of delegation as well. This would enable, with Graftroot, a
version of Taproot where the trees are constructed interactively and do not have
any lookup cost.

Other than what's presently possible, there are no concrete proposals for adding
new delegation features to Bitcoin.

1. [Coin Delegation](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2021-March/018615.html)
1. [Graftroot](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2018-February/015700.html)
1. [Entroot](https://gist.github.com/sipa/ca1502f8465d0d5032d9dd2465f32603)
1. [G'Root (not graftroot)](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2018-July/016249.html)

### BIP-300 DriveChains

Drive chains are a highly application specific type of recursive covenant that
is designed to help sidechains operate by tracking sidechain deposits and
withdrawals with an on-chain miner driven voting system.

The sidechains would have the ability to run arbitrary smart contracts (at the
choice of the sidechain operators). Miners the upvote, downvote, or abstain from
voting on withdrawals through a special output type.

One of the main downsides to this approach is that the BIP-300 proposal as
written requires the addition of new global state databases, rather than local
state contained within the covenant transaction itself.


Overall Drivechains are relatively controversial among the community; with lots
of interest from the community and also some outspoken critics because of the
changes to Bitcoin's incentive stability for consensus. It's included here for
completeness and by request of what topics to cover in today's post.

It's the author's opinion that while the concept of Drivechains is useful, the
implementation of it does not need to be as transactions inside of the existing block
space and instead could be tracked via a separate commitment (like Segwit). This could
happen if Drivechains were implemented via a more generliazed covenant rather than
application specific.

1. [BIP-300](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0300.mediawiki)
1. [Drivechains](https://www.drivechain.info)

### Elements Opcodes

Elements is Blockstream's Bitcoin fork for their Liquid Sidechain. Elements has
planned to add a broad variety of opcodes that can help to accomplish a variety
of tasks, including many of the above, in addition to their existing extensions.

1. [Existing Opcodes](https://elementsproject.org/features/opcodes)
1. [Upgrade for Taproot](https://github.com/ElementsProject/elements/blob/master/doc/tapscript_opcodes.md)


<hr>

Breathe! That was a lot! There's still other stuff that's floating around, but
these are the top-of-mind primitives in my head for bringing more
programmability to Bitcoin.

Future posts will zero in on what's possible with BIP-119 and Sapio and help
make the case that it is a fantastic next step in Bitcoin's Upgrade journey by
showing (not telling) how one little limited opcode opens up an entire world of
possibilities, as well as laying out a -- dare I say -- personal roadmap for the
inclusion and development of other upgrades as a coherent narrative for Bitcoin.
