---
comments: True
disqusId: 6a9582e0a07860059412fb2ddc026c764897ac12
layout: post
title: "Day 1: Rubin's Bitcoin Advent Calendar"
date: 2021-11-28
hashtags: [Bitcoin, AdventCalendar]
---
What says Christmas more than an Advent Calendar to count the days till Santa
comes? Honestly, I'm not too sure, I'm a Jew. Happy Hanukkah everyone! But in
the spirit of the season, I figured the community would love a series of blog
posts (one a day) discussing the future of Bitcoin and Smart Contracts.

So here's how it's going to work:

## Today's the first day!

Advent Calendars are designed to be from the 4th Sunday
before Christmas till Christmas and as such vary in length. Lucky you; this
year is a long one! Unfortunately for me, I've got to make 26 more exciting
posts to pull this off. Each of these posts is going to be short-but-sweet
(much like the chocolates you're used to) and designed to highlight an
important concept or idea about Bitcoin Smart Contracting. I'll put each post
on my personal blog & tweet it out.

## This series is for you.

It doesn't matter if you're a programmer,
investor, pleb, or just trying to learn more. Through the series
I'll do my best to thoroughly introduce concepts for anyone to
follow along and learn.

## Of course I'm going to be a little biased.
The perspectives shared are my own and the focus is on things that I focus on,
but I'll do my best to present the balance and nuance!

If you want to send me some holiday cheer: `3E6p1UgrgwAFvZAF7xUiRcBR2vAEdYNXjZ`

Hope you enjoy the series!

