---
comments: True
disqusId: 6afbb190001890cb70fa61f5e5801ced0a88f3c2
layout: post
title: Open Letter on Diversity & Inclusion at Scaling Bitcoin
subtitle: ATTN&#58; Scaling Bitcoin Participants and Sponsors
date: 2017-09-27
permalink: /blog/2017/09/27/scaling-diversity-and-inclusion/
---
We started [Scaling Bitcoin](https://scalingbitcoin.org) with a deep commitment to diversity and inclusion.
Fundamentally, Scaling Bitcoin is about bringing together elements of the
Bitcoin community that would not otherwise -- many of the core contributors met
face to face for the first time in Montreal. Meeting face to face was a
fantastic opportunity to bridge divides and seek common goals; at Scaling
Bitcoin spontaneous discussions broke out which would have never occurred
online. Diversity and inclusion are key elements in pulling together different
parts of our community to have the discussions fruitfully. Fundamentally
Scaling Bitcoin exists to work towards eliminating any barrier to entry for any
person to contribute to Bitcoin's scientific and engineering ecosystem.

Diversity and inclusion are complicated multi-faceted topics -- at Scaling
Bitcoin, we do our best to address them from all sides. Our conference aspires
to be in a different region every time, from our first event in Montreal, to
Hong Kong, to Milan, and now, to Silicon Valley. Our participants and sponsors
come from all over the world (18 countries at the last event!), speak many
different languages, and have vastly different perspectives on how we'll
accomplish our shared goal of Scaling Bitcoin.

We help people attend Scaling Bitcoin who would not be able to otherwise as a
part of our diversity and inclusion efforts. This help comes in multiple forms,
including discounted tickets for students, as well as travel and accommodation
assistance for those who require it. Our chief concern is getting the
individuals most likely to contribute to Bitcoin's scientific and engineering
ecosystem to the conference. We also try to help those who face additional
difficulties to better integrate into the community. In past Scaling Bitcoins,
this has included efforts and special programming through our academic
supporting organizations to better socially integrate low-income, minority, and
female participants at Scaling Bitcoin. For example, at Milan one of our
Academic partners ([The MIT DCI](http://dci.mit.edu)) hosted a special dinner for the students from
their summer bootcamp ([you can read about it
here](https://medium.com/mit-media-lab-digital-currency-initiative/apply-now-mit-intro-to-cryptocurrencies-bootcamp-for-underrepresented-minorities-and-women-ba85fa8fc898))
to get to interact with some core developers in a smaller group setting.

Bitcoin developers and scientists don't just materialize overnight, it requires
diligent study and effort. This is an intimidating prospect for almost anyone,
and many capable developers drop out for lack of good support. Initiatives like
[Chaincode](http://chaincode.com)'s [Hacker
Residency](http://bluematt.bitcoin.ninja/2016/08/08/chaincode/) and
[DGLAB](https://www.dglab.com/en/)'s [BC2](https://bc-2.jp/) workshop have been
wildly successful in nurturing talented Bitcoin Core Developers. Scaling
Bitcoin is simply doing our part to onboard more talent. Explicitly seeking to
onboard talent from diverse backgrounds is a critical for engineering Bitcoin
to be an empowering technology to meet the needs of users all over the world.
The last several decades of research on the subject shows that seeking out
social diversity leads to better decision-making across the board ([read about
the research
here](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-diversity-makes-us-smarter/)).

This year, as a part of our efforts to improve Scaling Bitcoin by better
structuring our Planning Committee we created a Diversity & Inclusion
Committee. This committee is comprised of individuals who were excited to help
us to continue our efforts around diversity and inclusion. One of the main
tasks for this committee is to help us review and process subsidy requests,
which are awarded based on many factors, including, likelihood of contributing
to Bitcoin's scientific and engineering ecosystem, demonstrated need, and total
cost (we have a limited budget, after all). Despite now having an explicit
committee for diversity and inclusion, it continues to be the job of every
volunteer in Scaling Bitcoin to work towards eliminating any barrier to entry
for any person to contribute to Bitcoin's scientific and engineering ecosystem.
Different people experience different barriers to entry to a field like
Bitcoin, thus, the kinds of support programs we offer are not always available
to everyone (we can't afford to give everyone student ticket pricing!). The
Diversity & Inclusion Committee is there to ensure that our efforts are fair
and sufficient.

Technology conferences like Scaling Bitcoin present a remarkable opportunity
for building community. In light of recent reports of incidents of harassment
and exclusionary practices at tech conferences, we've take a progressive stance
on making sure that Scaling Bitcoin remains a respectful and safe space for all
of our participants to build that community. Incidents of harassment and
exclusionary practices negatively impact people of all genders, races, and
backgrounds, as well as the conferences and their communities. We take such
issues seriously and have required all participants to follow our [Code of
Conduct](https://scalingbitcoin.org/code-of-conduct) since the first Scaling Bitcoin event in 2015. 

Part of what makes Scaling Bitcoin such a remarkable gathering is the intense
level of focus on the technology during the event. Our CoC exists to minimize
the possibility of distractions and to maximize the learning, shared
understanding and technical advancement of one of the most important
engineering projects of our time. We hope that our attendees recognize and
support that objective, and the organizing committee will as well.

Additionally, the Program Committee, which handles talk selection, operates
with complete autonomy from the rest of the Scaling Bitcoin organization,
including the Diversity & Inclusion Committee. No one is excluded from the
conference as a result of our diversity and inclusion efforts. The main goal of
the Program Committee is to unbiasedly select talks with the highest potential
impact on Bitcoin. The majority of tickets are sold openly to the public. We
welcome any suggestions and ideas from the Bitcoin community as to how our
efforts can be more effective and we will continue to do our best to make
Bitcoin a more diverse and inclusive environment.  

We're excited to be hosting what we expect to be the best Scaling Bitcoin yet
this year. To increase our reach and impact in the community, we're hosting a 2
Day tutorial preceding Scaling Bitcoin called Dev++. This is a wonderful
opportunity for those just entering the space to get fast-paced high-quality
instruction on becoming a Bitcoin Engineer. Following the conference, we will
have a Career Fair and an event for startups to pitch to investors. You can
read more about these new initiatives at
[BitcoinEdge.org](https://bitcoinedge.org). 

Sincerely,

Jeremy Rubin

Scaling Bitcoin Planning Committee

_With special thanks to [Byron Gibson](https://twitter.com/byrongibson), [Neha
Narula](https://twitter.com/neha), and the rest of the Scaling Bitcoin Planning
Committee for reviewing and editing this letter, and for maintaining a strong
commitment to diversity and inclusion in Bitcoin._
