---
comments: True
disqusId: cf54ae0f8fb6360507bbcfa099d6290926c6c381
layout: post
title: "Pillars of Bitcoin: Decentralization"
subtitle: "Day 4: Rubin's Bitcoin Advent Calendar"
date: 2021-12-1
hashtags: [Bitcoin, AdventCalendar]
---

_Welcome to day 4 of my Bitcoin Advent Calendar. You can see an index of all
the posts [here](/advent21) or subscribe at
[judica.org/join](https://judica.org/join) to get new posts in your inbox_

Many may have tried, but few have successfully characterized what "being
decentralized" means in an objective / quantitative sense. Instead, we're left
with soft "know it when I see it"s.

Decentralization may be a pillar of Bitcoin with a lotta fanfare, but it's still
just a means to an end. It's about the Pantheon, not the pillars! A system can
be very decentralized and still kinda suck. Much like pillars with no roof won't
keep the rain out!


## Got Gas?
For a more than slightly contrived example, imagine a pre-internet driver
navigating gas stations prices.  Kind of "decentralized", right?
Users/purchasers operate on local information to see pricing and make a decent
decision, and sellers operate on local information to stay competitive. Over
time the network should "converge" a sellers learn who has better prices
throughout town, but from the perspective of an individual purchaser it's really
hard for them to determine within their remaining tank range/willingness to
drive across town for a dollar who has the best prices. So while the market
works as a decentralized pricing system, it's not highly consistent!


## It's Hard; No CAP

Computer network nerds have three rules for keeping their jobs: consistency,
availability, and partition tolerance. What do these mean in practice? Thinking
back to our gas analogy, gas stations are very available (you can always get gas
at some price), they're strongly partition tolerant (i.e., if you can't see
other gas station's advertised prices you won't know if it's better, but you can
still get gas). But the pricing might be all over the map! No consistency!

It's really hard to achieve all three properties -- there even exist proofs of
its impossibility. Instead, engineers make tradeoffs to achieve different
amounts of guarantee across the properties.

For Bitcoin we care a *lot* about consistency[^pedantic]. If I send money to
Alice, I should not be able to send it to Bob. We also care a lot about
partition tolerance. If some group of participants should shunt themselves out
from others, the system should still operate? So do we inherently care less
about availability? Well, kinda! If the "blockchain is closed" and you can't
transact, at least you still have your money. And technologies like Lightning
Network can help bridge the gaps if the Bitcoin blockchain is unavailable that
you can still fully confirm transactions as long as it comes back eventually.

So, interestingly, Availability seems like the property we need to care about
the least… but it's one of the main reasons we need decentralization! That's
because even though we might have a design that elevates the other two
properties, it doesn't mean that availability is unimportant. And availability
is not one monolithic level, there are many different types of availability
fault one might experience on a network. For example, you might experience
reduced or no availability if:

1. The network doesn't have blockspace at your price
1. The internet is down
1. Your usual peers are offline
1. Theres a fire at a major data center
1. Your battery on your phone dies
1. A big solar flare happens
1. An evil government changes your DNS records to your mining pool and you don't know the IP address
1. An evil government runs the network entirely and doesn't like your transactions so they get censored.

Some of these problems, decentralization can help us with! Some,
decentralization can't help with. And some are caused _by decentralization_. Uh
oh!

For example...

A fire a major data center can be defrayed by being more decentralized -- a fire
can only spread so far! The other data centers should be fine, since Bitcoin is
partition tolerant, the overall network is available.

If a big solar flare happens, there's not much *any* of us can do if all the
internet is down and our devices got fried. Too catastrophic… We can recover
eventually, your metal seed plates will be fine, but hopefully someone had some
Faraday cage shielded backups.

If blockspace is too expensive, decentralization may be the cause!

In order to keep the network decentralization friendly, Bitcoin uses far less
bandwidth and storage than a centralized system (like Google) could use. This
ensures that participants on the network need not be particularly well resourced
or well connected to be a meaningful, full participant in the Bitcoin Network.

That's because of another availability issue: censorship. Bitcoin fundamentally
stands as a fuck-you to the entrenched powers that be. As such, Bitcoin uses
decentralization to guarantee censorship-resistance against state actors. While
there's been much ink scaled about the censorship of scalability v.s. the
censorship of state actors, Bitcoin is hyper focused on providing some form of
"equal protection".

Everyone hates that you lose availability from high tx prices, and all are
equally affected[^arguably]. Everyone hates solar flares, and all are equally
affected. But with state actor censorship, enemies of the state, be they Jews,
Conservative Non-Profits, Black Americans, Gazan Chocolatiers, People who
believe things posted on \*\*\*\*\*\*\*'s Twitter Account etc, can be picked
apart and subjected to selective abuses.  If anyone can run a node (and
hopefully miner), and most people don't have a political agenda, we can maybe
protect individuals of any background.


As such, Bitcoin's decentralization is focused on censorship-resistance, even at
the expense of on-chain availability.


## The Neverending Story
The story doesn't end there. Decentralization, as we noted earlier, is very
tough to quantify. Even if we can't quantify it, we can still reason about
decentralization efficiency. Given the "costs of decentralization", how much
censorship resistance do we get? Can we decrease the costs and achieve the same
amount?  Can we keep the cost the same and gain more censorship resistance?
Or... do we need to increase the costs, because we're not censorship resistant
enough? Stay tuned for future posts we're we'll see if we can't do something
about it!


[^pedantic]: If we're being pedantic, technically Bitcoin sacrifices consistency for _eventual consistency_ to preserve the other properties... but it really depends on what you view the "output" of the network being as you can detect consistency losses by seeing hashrate decreases, for example. My opinion is we sacrifice availability of high quality confirmations for consistency...
[^arguably]: There is a complex interaction between scalability solutions and chain space that can help bridge the fact that rich people are typically in power and poorer people aren't.
