---
comments: True
disqusId: 5644eab8c430c2c0933824e5db638e34d4a784e1 
layout: post
title: "A Calculus of Covenants"
date: 2022-04-12
---

_This originally appeared on the [mailing list](https://gnusha.org/pi/bitcoindev/CAD5xwhjBkKVuiPaRJZrsq+GcvSeht+SHvmmiH2MjnU2k1m_4gw@mail.gmail.com/)._

This is a framework for thinking about covenants. It is most useful for modeling local covenants, that is, covenants where only one coin must be examined, and not multi-coin covenants whereby you could have issues with protocol forking requiring a more powerful stateful prover. It's the model I use in Sapio.

This is from the perspective of a developer trying to build infrastructure for covenants. from the perspective of bitcoin consensus, a covenant enforcing primitve would be something like OP_TLUV and less so it's use in conjunction with other opcodes, e.g. OP_AMOUNT.

One must also analyze all the covenants that one could author using a primitive, in some sense, to demonstrate that our understanding is sufficient. As a trivial example, you could use OP_DELETE_BITCOIN_ENTIRELY_IF_KNOWS_PREIMAGE_TO_X_OR_TLUV and just because you could use it safely for TLUV would not mean we should add that opcode if there's some way of using it negatively.

With that said, let us begin:

I define a covenant primitive as follows:

1) A set of sets of transaction intents (a family), potentially recursive or co-recursive (e.g., the types of state transitions that can be generated). These intents can also be represented by a language that generates the transactions, rather than the literal transactions themselves. We do the family rather than just sets at this level because to instantiate a covenant we must pick a member of the family to use.
2) A verifier generator function that generates a function that accepts an intent that is any element of one member of the family of intents and a proof for it and rejects others.
3) A prover generator function that generates a function that takes an intent that is any element of one member of the family and some extra data and returns either a new prover function, a finished proof, or a rejection (if not a valid intent).
4) A set of proofs that the Prover, Verifier, and a set of intents are "impedance matched", that is, all statements the prover can prove and all statements the verifier can verify are one-to-one and onto (or something similar), and that this also is one-to-one and onto with one element of the intents (a set of transactions) and no other.
5) A set of assumptions under which the covenant is verified (e.g., a multi-sig covenant with at least 1-n honesty, a multisig covenant with any 3-n honesty required, Sha256 collision resistance, DLog Hardness, a SGX module being correct).

To instantiate a covenant, the user would pick a particular element of the set of sets of transaction intents. For example, in TLUV payment pool, it would be the set of all balance adjusting transactions and redemptions. Note, we can 'cleave' covenants into separate bits -- e.g. one TLUV + some extra CTV paths can be 'composed', but the composition is not guaranteed to be well formed.

Once the user has a particular intent, they then must generate a verifier which can receive any member of the set of intents and accept it, and receive any transaction outside the intents and reject it.

With the verifier in hand (or at the same time), the user must then generate a prover function that can make a proof for any intent that the verifier will accept. This could be modeled as a continuation system (e.g., multisig requires multiple calls into the prover), or it could be considered to be wrapped as an all-at-once function. The prover could be done via a multi-sig in which case the assumptions are stronger, but it still should be well formed such that the signers can clearly and unambiguously sign all intents and reject all non intents, otherwise the covenant is not well formed.

The proofs of validity of the first three parts and the assumptions for them should be clear, but do not require generation for use. However, covenants which do not easily permit proofs are less useful.

We now can analyze three covenants under this, plain CTV, 2-3 online multisig, 3-3 presigned + deleted.

CTV:
1) Intent sets: the set of specific next transactions, with unbound inputs into it that can be mutated (but once the parent is known, can be filled in for all children).
2) Verifier: The transaction has the hash of the intent
3) Prover: The transaction itself and no other work
4) Proofs of impedance: trivial.
5) Assumptions: sha256
6) Composition: Any two CTVs can be OR'd together as separate leafs

2-3 Multisig:
1) Intent: All possible sets of transactions, one set selected per instance
2) Verifier: At least 2 signed the transition
3) Prover: Receive some 'state' in the form of business logic to enforce, only sign if that is satisfied. Produce a signature.
4) Impedance: The business logic must cover the instance's Intent set and must not be able to reach any other non-intent
5) Assumptions: at least 2 parties are 'honest' for both liveness and for correctness, and the usual suspects (sha256, schnorr, etc)
6) Composition: Any two groups can be OR'd together, if the groups have different signers, then the assumptions expand

3-3 Presigned:
Same as CTV except:
5) Assumptions: at least one party deletes their key after signing


 You can also think through other covenants like TLUV in this model.

One useful question is the 'cardinality' of an intent set. The useful notion of this is both in magnitude but also contains. Obviously, many of these are infinite sets, but if one set 'contains' another then it is definitionally more powerful. Also, if a set of transitions is 'bigger' (work to do on what that means?) than another it is potentially more powerful.

Another question is around composition of different covenants inside of an intent -- e.g., a TLUV that has a branch with a CTV or vice versa. We consider this outside the model, analysis should be limited to "with only these covenants what could you build". Obviously, one recursive primitive makes all primitives recursive.

Another question is 'unrollability'. Can the intents, and the intents of the outputs of the intents, be unrolled into a representation for a specific instantiation? Or is that set of possible transactions infinite? How infinite? CTV is, e.g., unrollable.


Last note on statefulness: The above has baked into it a notion of 'statelessness', but it's very possible and probably required that provers maintain some external state in order to prove (whether multisig or not). E.g., a multisig managing an account model covenant may need to track who is owed what. This data can sometimes be put e.g. in an op return, an extra tapleaf branch, or just considered exogenous to the covenant. But the idea that a prover isn't just deciding on what to do based on purely local information to an output descriptor is important.


For Sapio in particular, this framework is useful because if you can answer the above questions on intents, and prover/verifier generators, then you would be able to generate tooling that could integrate your covenant into Sapio and have things work nicely. If you can't answer these questions (in code?) then your covenant might not be 'well formed'. The efficiency of a prover or verifier is out of scope of this framework, which focuses on the engineering + design, but can also be analyzed.